added new tutorial for metrics ingestion based on otel-collector (#236)
kyma-project/examples: metrics-otlp/README.md

# Install an OTLP based metrics collector 

## Overview

The following instructions demonstrates how to install [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-collector)s on a Kyma cluster using the official [Helm chart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-collector) with the goal to collect and ship workload metrics to an OTLP endpoint. For a fully Prometheus-based approach please have a look at the [Prometheus](./../prometheus/README.md) tutorial instead.

The setup will bring an OpenTelemetry Collector Deployment acting as gateway where all the cluster-wide metrics should be ingested to. The gateway will then care about enriching the metrics with missing resource attributes and dies the actual shipment to a target backend.

Furthermore it brings an OpenTelemetry Collector DaemonSet acting as agent running on each node. Here, node specific metrics relevant for your workload are getting determined and an annotation based workload scraper is running there, scraping all containers running on the related node.

> 

Reviewer: Adding a headline so we can link to it.

```suggestion
## Architecture

```

   
   As this instructions are not providing any backend, the following command sets the backend configuration with placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken` which needs to get adjusted to your needs. Be aware of, that a token should be provided using a Secret which gets mounted via the `extraEnvs` parameter. As this cannot be passed via the command itself in an easy way, please consider using a dedicated additional values.yaml file for that.

   ```bash
   helm upgrade metrics-gateway open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector --version 0.47.0 --install --namespace $KYMA_NS \
     -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/metrics-otlp/metrics-gateway-values.yaml \
     --set config.exporters.otlp.endpoint="{myEndpoint}" \
     --set config.exporters.otlp.headers.Authorization="Bearer {myToken}"
   ```

1. Verify the deployment
   Check that the related Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS rollout status deploy metrics-gateway
   ```

## Install the agent

> 1. Deploy the agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Deploy the agent.
```

>    The gateway deployed in the previous step can be used to push metrics via OTLP. If you prefer to use the prometheus pull-approach, a dedicated instance is needed for scraping your workload. Furthermore, an agent is required running as a daemonset in order to retrieve node specific metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The gateway deployed in the previous step can be used to _push_ metrics via OTLP. If you prefer to use the Prometheus _pull_ approach, you need a dedicated instance to scrape your workload. Furthermore, to retrieve node-specific metrics, you need an agent as a DaemonSet.
```

   
   The following command will deploy an otel-collector using the upstream helm chart with prepared [values](./metrics-agent-values.yaml). The values file is defining a metrics pipeline for scraping workload by annotation and pushing them to the gateway. It defines also a second metrics pipeline determining node-specific metrics for your workload from the nodes kubelet and the nodes filesystem itself.

   ```bash
   helm upgrade metrics-agent open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector --version 0.47.0 --install --namespace $KYMA_NS \
     -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/metrics-otlp/metrics-agent-values.yaml \
     --set config.exporters.otlp.endpoint=metrics-gateway.$KYMA_NS:4317
   ```

> 1. Verify the deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify the deployment.
```

   Check that the related Pod has been created in the Namespace and is in the `Running` state:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS rollout status daemonset metrics-agent
   ```

> ## Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Result
```

This is simply the result of the instructions, right?  How to use the setup comes afterwards.

> After you have followed the instructions you should have a setup in place as outlined in the diagram on top of the tutorial, with a gateway and an agent. By default, the node specific metrics are getting ingested by the agent automatically and pushed via the gateway to the configured backend. Furthermore, metrics for the gateway and agent instances itself will be exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you have a setup in place as outlined in the [architecture diagram](#architecture), with a gateway and an agent. By default, the node-specific metrics are automatically ingested by the agent, and pushed via the gateway to the configured backend. Furthermore, metrics for the gateway and agent instances are exported.
```

> To add metrics ingestion for your custom workload you have two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Usage

To add metrics ingestion for your custom workload, you have the following options:
```

if we don't mention "two", we won't have to update this line if another option is added.

> ### Prometheus pull-based on base of annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prometheus pull-based, with annotations
```

That approach assumes that you instrumented your application using a library like the [prometheus client library](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/), having a port in your workload exposed serving a typical prometheus metrics endpoint.

The agent is configured with a generic scrape configuration which will determine endpoints to scrape in the cluster via annotations. You can either put the annotations to a service resolving your metrics port or directly at the pod itself. The annotations are as followed:

```yaml
prometheus.io/scrape: "true"   # mandatory to enable automatic scraping
prometheus.io/scheme: https    # optional, default is "http" if no Istio sidecar is used. When using a sidecar (Pod has label `security.istio.io/tlsMode=istio`), the default is "https". Use "https" to scrape workloads using Istio client certificates.
prometheus.io/port: "1234"     # optional, configure the port under which the metrics are exposed
prometheus.io/path: /myMetrics # optional, configure the path under which the metrics are exposed
```

> Having the annotations in place is everything you need, metrics ingestion should start automatically.

Reviewer: To me it feels like this might belong to the introductory paragraph

```suggestion
```

> Be aware of, that the agent is capable of scraping endpoints even if the workload is using istio and accepts only mTLS communication. As the agent itself should not be part of the Service Mesh in order to observe the Service Mesh, the agent uses a sidecar but having no traffic interception enabled at all. Instead it mounts the client certificate and uses the certificate natively for the communication. That is a [recommended approach](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#tls-settings) by Istio itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **NOTE:** The agent can scrape endpoints even if the workload uses Istio and accepts only mTLS communication. Because the agent itself should not be part of the Service Mesh in order to observe the Service Mesh, the agent uses a sidecar but has no traffic interception enabled. Instead, it mounts the client certificate and uses the certificate natively for the communication. That is a [recommended approach](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#tls-settings) by Istio.
```

### OpenTelemetry push-based

> That approach assumes that you instrumented your workload using the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/). Here, you only need to tell your workload to which target it should push the metrics. By using the deployed gateway, the application configuration does not need to be aware of any target backend, it only needs to get the static endpoint of the gateway. That can be achieved by configuring the SDK-specific [environment variables](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/protocol/exporter/). Also, if not done yet as part of your instrumentation, you strongly should configure a service name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach assumes that you instrumented your workload using the [OpenTelemetry SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/instrumentation/). Here, you only need to tell your workload to which target it should push the metrics. By using the deployed gateway, the application configuration does not need to be aware of any target backend, it only needs to get the static endpoint of the gateway. To achieve this, configure the SDK-specific [environment variables](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/protocol/exporter/). Also, if not done yet as part of your instrumentation, it's strongly recommended that you configure a service name.
```

Furthermore, the setup brings an OpenTelemetry Collector DaemonSet acting as agent running on each node. Here, node-specific metrics relevant for your workload are determined. This is also where an annotation-based workload scraper is running, which scrapes all containers running on the related node.
## Architecture

[Architecture](./assets/overview.drawio.svg)

## Prerequisites

- Kyma Open Source 2.10.x or higher
- kubectl version 1.22.x or higher
- Helm 3.x

## Preparation

1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace the `{namespace}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

    ```bash
    export KYMA_NS="{namespace}"
    ```

1. If you haven't created a Namespace yet, do it now and enable Istio injection with the following label:
    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $KYMA_NS
    kubectl label namespace $KYMA_NS istio-injection=enabled
    ```

1. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:

    ```bash
    helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

> ## Install the gateway

Reviewer: Why does the headline say "install", but all related instructions talk about "deploy"...?
 
```suggestion
## Deploy the gateway
```

> 1. Deploy the gateway.

Reviewer: After renaming the headline, we remove the duplicate phrase and come right to the instruction.

```suggestion
1. Deploy an Otel Collector using the upstream Helm chart with a prepared [values.yaml](./metrics-gateway-values.yaml) file.
```

>    Deploy an Otel Collector using the upstream Helm chart with a prepared [values](./metrics-gateway-values.yaml). The values file defines a pipeline for receiving OTLP metrics, enriches them with resource attributes that fulfil the Kubernetes semantic conventions, and then exports them to a custom OTLP backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The values file defines a pipeline for receiving OTLP metrics, enriches them with resource attributes that fulfil the Kubernetes semantic conventions, and then exports them to a custom OTLP backend.
```

>    The previous instructions don't provide any backend, so run the following command to set the backend configuration with placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken`. Adjust them to your needs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The previous instructions don't provide any backend, so you must set the backend configuration. 
   - If you don't want to use a Secret, use the following command, and adjust the placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken` to your needs:
```

   ```bash
   helm upgrade metrics-gateway open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector --version 0.47.0 --install --namespace $KYMA_NS \
     -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/metrics-otlp/metrics-gateway-values.yaml \
     --set config.exporters.otlp.endpoint="{myEndpoint}" \
     --set config.exporters.otlp.headers.Authorization="Bearer {myToken}"
   ```

>    _Alternative_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Replaced by formatting as Tip

>    It's recommended that you provide tokens using a Secret. To achieve that, you can mount the relevant attributes of your secret via the `extraEnvs` parameter and use placeholders for referencing the actual env values. An example is provided at the [secret-values.yaml](./secret-values.yaml) file which can be adjusted to your specific secret and then used like that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **TIP:** It's recommended that you provide tokens using a Secret. To achieve that, you can mount the relevant attributes of your secret via the `extraEnvs` parameter and use placeholders for referencing the actual environment values. Take a look at the provided sample [secret-values.yaml](./secret-values.yaml) file, adjust it to your Secret, and run:
```

   ```

## Result

Now, you have a setup in place as outlined in the [architecture diagram](#architecture), with a gateway and an agent. By default, the node-specific metrics are automatically ingested by the agent, and pushed via the gateway to the configured backend. Furthermore, metrics for the gateway and agent instances are exported.

## Usage

To add metrics ingestion for your custom workload, you have the following options:

### Prometheus pull-based, with annotations

This approach assumes that you instrumented your application using a library like the [prometheus client library](https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/clientlibs/), having a port in your workload exposed serving a typical Prometheus metrics endpoint.

The agent is configured with a generic scrape configuration, which uses annotations to specify the endpoints to scrape in the cluster. 
Having the annotations in place is everything you need for metrics ingestion to start automatically.

Put the following annotations either to a service that resolves your metrics port, or directly to the pod:

```yaml
prometheus.io/scrape: "true"   # mandatory to enable automatic scraping

> prometheus.io/scheme: https    # optional, default is "http" if no Istio sidecar is used. When using a sidecar (Pod has label `security.istio.io/tlsMode=istio`), the default is "https". Use "https" to scrape workloads using Istio client certificates.

Reviewer 2: The pod-endpoints scrape_config does not have a tls_config. Was that intentional? Then we should give a hint that https works only on services.

Author: Very good finding, have not tested the final setup once more.

    helm repo update
    ```

## Deploy the gateway

1. Deploy an Otel Collector using the upstream Helm chart with a prepared [values.yaml](./metrics-gateway-values.yaml) file.

   The values file defines a pipeline for receiving OTLP metrics, enriches them with resource attributes that fulfil the Kubernetes semantic conventions, and then exports them to a custom OTLP backend.
   
   The previous instructions don't provide any backend, so you must set the backend configuration. 

>    - If you don't want to use a Secret, use the following command, and adjust the placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken` to your needs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you don't want to use a Secret, use the following command, and adjust the placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken` to your needs:
```

## Install the gateway

1. Deploy the gateway.

   Deploy an Otel Collector using the upstream Helm chart with a prepared [values](./metrics-gateway-values.yaml). The values file defines a pipeline for receiving OTLP metrics, enriches them with resource attributes that fulfil the Kubernetes semantic conventions, and then exports them to a custom OTLP backend.
   

>    Because these instructions don't provide any backend, the following command sets the backend configuration with placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken`. Adjust them to your needs. It's recommended that you provide a token using a Secret, which is mounted with the `extraEnvs` parameter. Because the parameter  cannot be passed with the command easily, use a dedicated additional `values.yaml` file for that.

Reviewer: Twice "because" is ugly, I didn't notice that in my first review. Also, I found a duplicate blank space :D 

```suggestion
   These instructions don't provide any backend, so use the following command to set the backend configuration with placeholders `myEndpoint` and `myToken`. Adjust them to your needs.
   It's recommended that you provide a token using a Secret, which is mounted with the `extraEnvs` parameter. Because the parameter cannot be passed with the command easily, use a dedicated additional `values.yaml` file for that.
```

> **NOTE:** The agent can scrape endpoints even if the workload uses Istio and accepts only mTLS communication. Because the agent itself should not be part of the Service Mesh in order to observe the Service Mesh, the agent uses a sidecar but has no traffic interception enabled. Instead, it mounts the client certificate and uses the certificate natively for the communication. That is a [recommended approach](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/integrations/prometheus/#tls-settings) by Istio.

> To try it out, you can install the demo app taken from this [tutorial](https://github.com/kyma-project/examples/tree/main/prometheus/monitoring-custom-metrics) and annotate the workload with the annotations mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To try it out, you can install the demo app taken from the tutorial [Expose Custom Metrics in Kyma](https://github.com/kyma-project/examples/tree/main/prometheus/monitoring-custom-metrics) and annotate the workload with the annotations mentioned above.
```

```bash
kubectl apply -n $KYMA_NS -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kyma-project/examples/main/prometheus/monitoring-custom-metrics/deployment/deployment.yaml
kubectl -n $KYMA_NS annotate service sample-metrics prometheus.io/scrape=true
kubectl -n $KYMA_NS annotate service sample-metrics prometheus.io/port=8080
```

> The workload exposes a metric with name `cpu_temperature_celsius` at port `8080` and that metric should now automatically get ingested to your configured backend..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workload exposes the metric `cpu_temperature_celsius` at port `8080`, which is then automatically ingested to your configured backend.
```
